Thank you, Xavier.
So, as Xavier said,
my name is Robin Mikawa.
I'm the manager of the
Type Engineering team at Apple Computer.
And I'll be talking to
you today about fonts.
But not just fonts.
I'm going to be talking about the font
system architecture and how it works,
how it interacts with
your application software,
and how you can take advantage
of it to make a really,
really excellent user experience.
So, let's get started.
So why am I talking about fonts?
Why are fonts important?
Well, think about it this way.
Imagine rolling the clock back 20,
30 years and think about
how fonts worked back then.
You would have had one
font on the system,
maybe a green or amber screen,
and that's it.
Maybe at best you had a handful of
fonts that you had to deal with.
Well,
things have obviously changed since then.
We have dozens of fonts that get
installed by default on Mac OS X.
Users can install even more
fonts on their systems.
Applications come with
specialized fonts along with them.
So you have tons of fonts
you get to deal with,
even by default.
Another thing that we've gotten
feedback on with Mac OS X has
been that fonts are complicated.
People have to deal with a whole
variety of issues with regard to fonts,
even with just installing
or previewing them.
You might have encountered
that with your family members,
asking, well, where do I put these fonts?
I see a bunch of different
directories with the name fonts on it.
Where does it go?
And so what we've tried to do with
Panther is tie into that whole
initiative to put the user at the center.
As opposed to having fonts very
computer-centric and file-centric,
we want to make it so that the users
can really take advantage of fonts
and really find it easy and convenient
to use and really take advantage of
all the stuff that font developers
and you guys have put in to make these
things expressive and fully functional.
So what I'll be talking about today,
I'm going to be starting off with a
description of the font architecture.
You're going to get a chance to
understand what the system does,
what it does for you,
and what all the different components do
and how they interact with each other.
The second part of the session,
I'll be talking about what you can do
to take advantage of the system and
bring it across to your applications
and really make things shine.
So let me just dive straight
into the first section.
You can think of it this way.
I'm going to be lifting
up the hood on the system,
pulling out the font
engine or the font system,
and showing you how all
the different pieces work.
And right up here,
I've got a short list of all
the different components related
to the font architecture.
So let me just run through them.
First off,
we've got the font database system,
the font registry, as we call it.
This keeps track of all the information
related to the fonts and manages all
the fonts that the user can access.
Secondly, we have the font rasterizers.
It's the font engine that
basically takes the font data,
the raw font data,
converts it over to data that can be
used by other parts of the system,
such as the graphics system
or the printing architecture
or even your applications.
The next level up,
we've got the messaging system.
One thing that you should understand
is that we have implemented a
centralized font server that keeps
track of all of this information.
In order for it to communicate the
font data to your applications and
to other processes on the system,
it needs to send messages,
and these are based on the
Mach kernel messaging system.
Another level up,
we've got the caching system.
We've got the caches to optimize
performance so that you don't have to
always hit the lower levels of the system
to get the font data that you need.
And then this is the next level up.
We've got the programming interface.
This is what you've traditionally
heard in the past and what
we've really focused on.
What I'm trying to do here is connect
you to the operating system and show
you what the programming interface can
do for you and why we've told you to
do certain things as opposed to others.
And then finally, on top of that,
as part of this initiative to
put the user at the center,
we've implemented and exposed a number
of standard user interface elements
that you could take advantage of so
that your applications really fit in,
have a consistent user interface,
and take advantage of all
the new features that we've
implemented for Panther.
So what I've just described is a short
list of all the different components,
or the major components
in the font system.
What this diagram shows you are
how they interact with each other.
So over on the far right,
you'll see two of the components.
Those are the components that
reside within the font server,
or the ATS server,
as you might have seen it
called within the system.
The ATS, by the way,
stands for Apple Type Services,
and that's actually the main component
that my team is responsible for.
So within the server,
centralized for all of the different
processes available on the system,
we've got the font rasterizers and
the font database management system,
or the font registry.
On the left-hand side of the screen,
you see everything that resides
mainly within your application
context as opposed to the font server.
That includes the user interface,
whether you implement it or
the system implements it or
some combination between that.
We have the programming
interface and we have the caches.
And in between the two of them,
we have messages going back and forth
across to communicate the font-related
data that your applications need and,
more importantly, what your users need.
Okay, so let me start diving into
the details of this diagram.
First off,
let me work from the very basics here.
The font registry itself,
it is the central repository
of font information.
You can also think of it as the
interface to the file system that
lives underneath everything else.
So users, for example,
might install fonts.
We track that information.
We handle mapping in all of the
file-related information and
pull it into the font registry.
database.
The font registry also tracks all the
different locations that are supported
on Mac OS X for installing fonts,
and it also keeps track of the files
that are associated with the fonts
within each of those locations.
The font registry is also responsible
for managing the support for access
privileges and multiple users.
So for example,
we've done a considerable amount of
work for Panther to support the new
fast user switching feature that
you might have seen in the keynote.
Another piece of information
that we keep track of with the
fonts has to do with the state
and also the usage of the fonts.
Part of the work that we do within
the font registry is we synthesize
data and provide a canonical format
for accessing font-related data.
There's a number of different
pieces of information,
including the character
mapping information,
the paths, the outline data,
the bitmap information, the metrics.
We handle all of that through
the font registry and other
parts of the font architecture.
We also keep track of fonts
that somehow get corrupted
or actually bad starting off.
We can actually tag those fonts
as corrupted or bad or potentially
causing a crash during runtime and
prevent other users or other processes
from running into that problem again.
And that state information is kept
track of in the font registry.
One additional piece of information,
or one additional service
provided by the font registry,
is keeping track of all the different,
the multitude of file
formats available for fonts.
So, for example,
some fonts are stored in single files,
other ones are stored in multiple
files that get associated with
each other in certain ways,
you know, by file name or maybe something
buried deep within the font file.
Another thing we keep track of
is whether or not that particular
font data is stored within the data
fork or resource fork of a file.
So that covers the basics of
what the font registry does.
Next, I'll be describing what
the font rasterizers do.
Now, you can think of these
as the basic engines.
These know all the details
about the font data.
They can take the font data
that's stored in the file system,
run through it,
and spit out other forms of data that
can be used by other parts of the system.
So that includes graphic data,
the bitmaps, the paths,
the outlines that get rendered
through the graphics systems.
We also provide support for converting
data from what's natively stored
on disk to the formats used in,
for example, PDF documents when you
embed font data within them.
Also,
we convert data to the form used when
downloading fonts to the printing system,
generating PostScript forms of the font.
for example.
The other thing that we do with the
font rasterizers is very similar
to the way the font registry
handles different file formats.
The font rasterizers,
they actually know all the
details about the different
formats available out there.
So not only can fonts be stored
in different file formats,
they can be stored in different
data formats themselves.
So we've got the standard technologies
that are out there right now,
TrueType, PostScript.
We support multiple forms of them,
including the Type 1 format that you're
probably used to on Mac OS 9 and older.
And we also support the new CFF or
Compact Font format that's available with
the OpenType form of the PostScript fonts
and also used in PDF documents.
And then last but not least,
we support the older or
legacy bitmap-only formats.
that were available for
Quickdraw-based applications.
Okay, so next,
let me talk about the messaging system.
As I mentioned before,
the main thing about messages is
that they are based on the lower
level kernel messaging system.
They're the inter-process
communication mechanism for going
back and forth between the font
server and your processes and
other processes on the system.
Another key thing that you can remember
from this is that pretty much any
programming interface related to the
font may ultimately result in a message
that goes from your application out
to the server and potentially back.
Note that this can take time,
and I'll be touching on this
subject a little bit later on.
Now, messages can be categorized
into different classes.
The one that's probably most
relevant to you is that when changes
occur within the font registry,
The font server will actually
broadcast messages out to any
clients that are interested,
notification about these changes.
Similarly, there's also support for your
applications to send notification
messages back to the ATS server so
that you can notify us to do certain
actions or update our font registry.
There's one additional flavor
of messages or quirk on it that
we've implemented through our API,
and that includes support for actually
hooking into the messaging system.
The way this works, for example,
is basically since a number of
messages that applications can send
out for querying about missing fonts,
let's say you open a document,
it doesn't have the fonts you need,
what that can often do is trigger
a message across the font server to
ask for a replacement or to find out
whether it's actually present or not.
We've provided a mechanism so that
you can hook into that process,
intercept that message,
and provide your own level of support
for handling that missing font.
So some font utility application vendors
have actually taken advantage of this
and provided a user interface or even
automatically provide the appropriate
font and activate it within the system.
So this shows you some of
the strengths and benefits of
going to a messaging system.
The next level are the caches.
Now, as I mentioned before,
there is a cost to doing
messages and having this whole
font server-based architecture.
What we try to do with the caches,
and what we've succeeded actually,
is making sure that the most
commonly used functions and the most
commonly used data that you access
is available as fast as possible
through this caching mechanism.
You'll notice that the key areas that
we're trying to shield you from are
the lower levels in the font system.
So, for example,
the font registry corresponds
to the file system usage.
It takes time to pull in a font file,
read it in, and handle it and process it.
In fact,
processing it is the next level up
that we try to reduce the impact
performance-wise on your applications.
It takes time to run through.
In fact, for PostScript fonts,
we have to parse through the entire
PostScript font program in order
to get even basic data such as
the metrics or one glyph outline.
And finally, as I mentioned,
messaging takes time.
It's often much faster to just do a
simple function call to access your
font data locally from within a cache
than sending a message off to the font
server and coming back with that data.
Okay,
so this is what you're probably most
familiar with and what you deal with on a
day-to-day basis when it comes to fonts.
So, as I mentioned earlier, ATS,
Apple Type Services,
we provide a direct API into the
font system through the ATS font API.
What this programming interface
allows you to do is modify or manage
the contents of the font registry.
You can also query the font
registry for information.
We also provide support for accessing
data directly from the font rasterizers.
And finally,
you can hook into the messaging
system and take advantage of it
with your own application software.
There are other APIs that are
available that are built on
top of the underlying ATS APIs,
and those include the text system
available within Cocoa or Carbon,
and also the legacy Quickdraw-based
font manager is built on
top of the ATS font system.
Now this is the last block diagram from
the architecture that I'll go over.
This is a description of
All the features that you might want to
have the user interface with regard to
fonts support for you and your customers.
First and foremost,
you want to be able to select or change
the font and style information in your
documents or in any piece of text.
You also want to be able to access
glyph-specific information within a font.
This includes stuff like what characters
does this particular font support,
or can I get access to different
variants on a character.
And this is especially important
in the Asian market where there
are different forms of the
Han characters that people use in,
for example, their last names.
Another feature of the fonts that
you can get access through the user
interface are the typographic features.
This includes support for turning
on and off ligatures or other
variant forms within the font.
And then finally, as I mentioned,
one thing that people have really
asked us for in the operating
system is a really easy way to
manage the fonts that you have,
your collection of fonts.
This includes your
entire library of fonts.
There have been-- users have asked
for ways to install their fonts
much more easily and to be able to
preview their fonts much more easily.
And so with Panther,
we try to make that much more robust,
much more simple.
And also,
we want to have room for growing
and providing additional services.
So with that, I'd like to bring up one of
the other engineers on my team.
His name is Nathan Taylor.
And he'll give you a demonstration of
some of the work we've done for Panther.
Thank you, Robin.
As Robin said, I'm Nathan Taylor.
I'm an engineer with the
Apple Type Engineering Group.
And I'm very excited to show you
the new user interface and the user
interfaces that you should implement
for presenting fonts in a consistent
way to your users of the system.
We've taken the user-centric
approach to heart here.
And if you saw the keynote,
you saw a brief glimpse of something
I am very excited to show you today.
So with that,
I'd like to switch to demo one, please.
Okay, users just bought a bunch of fonts,
downloaded some fonts from the internet,
doesn't really know necessarily
what they look like,
and biggest question we've gotten
is where should we put these fonts?
You know, there are many font folders,
which is the best one to place them in?
We've tried to tell people
how to do it in Tech Notes,
but there's a much easier way,
and let me show you.
I'm going to open up a folder of
fonts here and go to one that's not
currently installed in Mac OS X.
It's a font that you know
and love from Mac OS 9.
This is the Type 1 version of it.
And if the user just
double clicks the font,
The FontBook application comes up
and shows a quick preview of the
font where they can switch between
and examine the different styles.
And with a single click
of a single button here,
the font will be installed in
what we consider the appropriate
place at this point in time.
That is the user's fonts folder.
When the font is installed,
the main font book user
interface comes up,
selects the font,
and they can see that their
action has actually taken effect.
This gives a quick and easy interface
to browse the fonts in the system.
With simple arrow keys or mouse actions,
the users can look at the
various fonts that are installed,
get an idea of what's available,
and if there are some that they don't
want or they're never going to use,
there's an option to turn them off.
I don't speak Korean,
I don't read Korean,
I don't write Korean.
I'm never going to use the
Korean fonts that always show
up at the top of the font list.
Well, I can simply select them in
FontBook and disable them.
Once FontBook is able to fonts,
they will no longer be available
and not show up in the fonts window
in Cocoa or Carbon applications.
and Koba.
It's also possible to
just add a bunch of fonts.
We have a breakdown of the font
library that shows how fonts
are grouped and categorized.
There are the user fonts
that are just my fonts.
There are the computer fonts,
which are shared between
all users of the system.
Network and classic similarly.
Users can move fonts around between
these directors if they want to.
What I'm going to do now
is add a bunch of fonts,
the rest of the fonts from that
big folder I took Palitino from.
And just add all the fonts there.
I'm going to show you building
collections and searching for fonts.
So all those fonts have been added.
You can see I've got Avenir, Bodoni.
All the ones I just
added are all selected.
What I can do now is,
I know I just installed
a bunch of ITC fonts,
but I want to group them so I can
easily find them within my application.
So, we have collection management
in Mac OS X to do this,
and using the new collection management
system provided by the Cocoa layer,
we can create a new collection.
Name it my ITC fonts.
And I want to add fonts to this.
Well, they're somewhere in this list,
right?
Well, let's find them.
Type ITC and I get all the fonts
that match my search string.
I can then select all these fonts.
and drag them over to
my collection there.
If I switch back to text edit now,
you'll see that the ITC Fonts
collection is available.
And selecting that
collection shows those fonts.
I can then simply use them.
They're available immediately.
Likewise, there are ways for users to
quickly manipulate collections.
They can tweak the collections.
They can remove individual
faces from them.
They can remove families.
They can also disable the collections
from within the Font Panel or
from within FontBook application.
Say, for example,
I don't like the heavy faces here.
You can select them and
disable them from this.
Let me do that again.
Disable them from the ITC collection,
rather than the library,
which I've already showed you.
And now, if I look at that family,
Franklin Gothic,
the heavy faces are not there anymore.
Easily just re-enabling
them brings them back.
If I don't want to use that
collection of fonts now,
I can simply disable the collection
and the collection is hidden from the UI.
The fonts are still active
for other apps to use,
but
The collection has been
hidden from the UI.
While you may ask,
I want to group these and
disable the fonts as a whole.
As optional behavior,
we do have the possibility
to disable the whole thing.
Pulling down the option
key and disabling this
will do what the alert here
says and disable all of
those fonts from the library.
If I look in all fonts here,
you can see that the ITC fonts
are marked off and the font is not
[Transcript missing]
So what do you need to do in your
applications to take advantage
of this new functionality
we're providing to the users?
We've made it easier for the
users to manipulate their fonts.
We think this is going to
allow them to do it more often.
They don't need to know where
fonts live in the system.
They can just launch an application
and turn things off as they wish.
If your app doesn't
react to these changes,
the user interface that you present
will not be consistent across the board,
and we'd like it to be user-centric
so that everything feels the
same in every application.
The first thing you can do,
and the least we ask you to do,
is implement support for
ATS font notifications.
If you have a Carbon application
or Cocoa application,
but in a Carbon application,
if you implement support
for notifications,
we will notify you and call
back a callback that you create.
And in this case,
I put up alert to be extremely obvious.
If we take a look in the fonts menu,
Avenir,
Badoni,
these fonts have been added to the
Fonts menu and immediately updated.
If I were to disable them,
they would not show up next
time the font was activated
and the Fonts menu was opened.
This corrects the problem of
having to quit the app and relaunch
the app from the old days and
makes it so much more consistent.
But there's one step further you can go,
and this is what we really ask you to do.
You can implement the fonts window.
If you're doing a Cocoa application,
it's pretty easy.
It's right there for you.
In Carbon, it's quite possible,
but it's not quite as easy,
but it's not hard at all.
And let me give you an example.
Let me just show you real quick.
I've got a similar version
of Simple Text here that has
a font window implemented.
Close it, bring it back up.
Like the other one,
I've got the same fonts,
and if I re-enable that ITC collection,
I can show you that...
All the support for collection
management and the user
managed collections are there.
If you implement the Fonts window,
subscribing to ATS notifications
actually become unnecessary because
the Fonts window handles that
automatically for you behind the scenes.
So what do you need to do to do this?
Adding notifications is
really a piece of cake.
First, I chose to implement
the standard fonts menu.
Three new function calls and effectively
only three new lines of code.
To add notifications,
I just created one callback
and made one function call.
Whenever that notification came across,
my callback updated the font menu,
and that was it.
It's a little more work to
put in the fonts window,
but we really don't think it's that hard.
If you've been moving to a
Carbon Events based application,
you probably already have a
standard Carbon Event handler.
But that's the first
thing you need to do.
And the handler I have in here
is about 20 lines of code.
Next I put in a handler attached to the
window to handle the font window events,
the font changes the user
made in the Fonts Panel,
and that's about 25 lines of code.
The last thing you need to do is
update the Fonts Window with the user
selection with one new function call.
Well, Robin also mentioned that
there were a bunch of other new
features to the Fonts window.
You see that there's a search field here.
We also have a direct
access to managing fonts.
brings up Fontbook directly,
and if the user has another
font management application,
we expect it to bring that up.
Further, we have Typography Palette.
This provides access to the
various font features that are
not default and are very sensible.
Zafino is a very pretty font
that we install with Mac OS X,
but it has a lot of features that you
can't get to right on the surface.
If you implement support
for the Typography Palette,
you can get access to
specialized ligatures,
Ornaments, stylistic variants,
old style figures, small caps,
a whole bunch of works.
Japanese fonts even have a lot more
to offer in this typographic palette.
For example, Hiragino,
one of the Japanese fonts
we ship with the system,
has many features.
You can see this is a huge palette here.
There's support for
Japanese features like kana widths,
where you can have full width,
half width, or proportional widths
for kana characters.
There's also support for stylistic
variants and other features
that the font may provide.
The last thing I want to show
you is the Character Palette.
You may have seen this
in other presentations,
but
There's direct access to get to
specific characters and to see all
the characters supported by a font.
Unfortunately,
we may have a little bit more work
to do on the Character Palette,
but I think you've seen it before.
You'll have a window,
access to all the glyphs or all
the Unicode points of the font,
and you'll be able to see
everything that's available.
We hope you like the new user-centric
approach to managing fonts on Mac OS X,
and we really hope you take two
points home from today's presentation.
One, we want a user-focused approach.
To do that,
we ask you to implement one of two
approaches in your application.
At a minimum,
respond to ATS font notifications.
Don't make the user relaunch your
application to see new fonts.
Or two, even better,
anywhere you would use a font menu,
provide access to the Fonts Panel so
we can have a standard user interface
for fonts across the entire system.
Thank you.
I'd now like to invite
Robin back to stage to finish
the rest of the presentation.
Thanks, Nathan.
So you've seen some of the really cool
user-level features that we've been
working on for Mac OS X in Panther.
So let me recap.
This is the second part
of the presentation.
This is where I go into what you
can do in your application software
to take advantage of some of the
features that we've implemented
and also to implement newer,
cooler features in your applications.
So if there's just two things you're
going to take away from this presentation
and you go back home from WWDC and
implement in your applications,
it's, as Nathan pointed out,
the first two items up here.
One, add support for the
standard user interface,
i.e., the fonts window or the
Font Panel if you're old school like me.
Also, add support, number two,
for handling not font notifications.
This will allow you to make sure that
your applications are as responsive
as possible to any changes in the
font registry that the user initiates
or other applications trigger.
I'll also cover some lower level
topics that are of interest to you.
The third item is particularly
important because people have asked.
We have a number of different
font referencing systems
in both Carbon and Cocoa.
And I'll go into detail about how you
can interact with the font system,
the ATS font system,
which underlies everything,
and take advantage of those
features within those layers.
I'll also go into some more detail
about specifics within ATS itself,
such as getting access or managing
the contents of the font registry,
getting access to
information stored within it,
and querying the font rasterizers
for information specific to glyphs.
Okay, so, as I said,
one of the key things we're asking you
to do is adopt a standard user interface.
Now, if you use Cocoa,
you get a lot of that for free.
In fact, you get most of that for free,
as Nathan pointed out.
But within Carbon applications,
you still need to do some amount of work.
It's not too bad, in fact.
If you look up here,
I've encapsulated the main
work that you need to do.
In fact, the first one's so easy,
I don't even have to make a slide for it.
If you have a standard,
if you're using the
standard Carbon event-based
application event handler,
all you have to do is add a
menu item that triggers off
of that standard command ID,
which is to show and hide the Font Panel.
Once that's in place, you're done.
Anytime the user selects that menu item,
it'll switch between the two
different states for showing
and hiding the Font Panel,
and it will initiate the Font Panel code,
pull it in, instantiate it, and show it.
on screen for you.
The other three items I'll go
into a little bit more detail
in the next couple of slides,
but they include support for handling
font selection events that come from
the Font Panel to your application.
So that includes whenever a user
changes the state of the Font Panel,
you get a notification about that
through a standard Carbon event.
Similarly, if somehow the state of
your document changes,
for example, if a user clicks through and
sets the cursor in different
locations within your document,
you want the Font Panel to
reflect those changes and sync up.
And so there is an API to
allow you to do that.
And then finally, the Font Panel,
as you can tell,
is specific to the current user focus.
So what you want to do is if a user
switches between different windows,
you want to be able to notify
the Font Panel that something
has changed and that it should
pay attention and also notify a
different window or event reference.
So first off,
handling font selection events is
straightforward and it's built in and
integrated with the Carbon Event System.
All you need to do is handle the
standard font selection event.
It's of the event class fonts,
and we have a specific event
type called font selection.
Within that event,
you can pull out the parameters
related to that event using the
standard Carbon event calls,
and we provide information on the
current state of the Font Panel.
So originally,
it was mainly the typeface family,
the font or the typeface,
and the size that was important.
Now as you can see,
we've added a bunch of additional
new features with Panther,
such as the typography palette,
and there's other features that
are related to stylistic effects,
such as handling
strikethroughs and underlines,
and other cooler effects that you might
not have been able to get natively
within the font or on previous systems.
So that information is stored within a
dictionary that gets passed back through
the Carbon event that you can also parse
and grab standard pieces of information.
So the typography,
the information about the typographic
features are actually stored,
for example, as a ATSU style attribute,
ATSUI style attribute,
that you can then pass to the ATSUI text
system in Carbon to render appropriately.
Similarly, we've added support for
the text style information,
such as the strikethroughs,
the underlines,
and the other cool features.
There's one more thing that's pretty
cool is that we also include information
about multiple master variations.
So you didn't get a
chance to see it here,
but if you install a
multiple master font,
you can use the typography palette
to go through all the different axes
in a multiple master font and take
advantage of those cool features.
In fact, the Apple standard font now,
Myriad,
is provided as a multiple master font.
So I take advantage of that personally
all the time on my system right now.
Okay, so when you set the font selection
through either changes in the cursor
position or the user uses some other
mechanism in your application to change
the setting of the font in your document,
what you need to do is provide
notification back to the
Font Panel that something has changed.
The way you do this is you use
the standard HIToolbox function
to get the target event ref.
This is a new data type that's available.
This is what's used by the Font Panel,
and in its function to set the
information for the current selection,
you pass the target event ref
and an array of data types that
are specific to the text system
that you're currently using.
So, for example, you can pass in.
An array of Atsui style
objects that correspond to the
current selection of your text.
It might actually just be one
if it's only a single style run,
or it could be multiple ones.
Once the Font Panel gets it,
it parses through that and it
sets its state accordingly.
So, for example,
if you had two style runs that
had like Helvetica as the family,
but maybe bold and italic,
you'll see that reflected
accordingly in the Font Panel,
where the family will be set to Helvetica
with the style or typeface information.
left blank to indicate
multiple selection.
Similarly, we also support passing in
Quickdraw text information,
which consists of the
traditional Quickdraw family
name and the style bit array.
Okay, so when users switch between
windows on your application,
you need to notify the
Font Panel that that's of the change.
And so within your event handler,
what you want to do is provide
support for the standard Carbon event
that notifies you that the window
focus has changed or that the
window focus has been relinquished.
And all you have to do at that
point is call that same function
to set the state of the Font Panel,
but just pass it a null event target ref.
What that does is it resets
the Font Panel so it knows it
doesn't need to send events out
to the previous window anymore,
and it can clear its state.
Usually what happens right after that
is the user has selected another window,
and you get a window
focus acquired event.
When you handle that event,
you basically do the same thing.
You can pull out the window
reference from the event parameters,
pull out the target event ref from that,
and then pass that information,
plus any additional style
information that you have,
to the Font Panel to indicate the
new selection within the new window.
Okay, so that was it.
That's all you have to do to
support the font window within
your Carbon applications.
So next, handling font notifications.
That's the other key thing
I'd like for you to remember
from this particular session.
And let me go into some
more details on that.
What handling font notification
does for you is it allows your
applications to be much more responsive
to changes that users do or other
applications do to the state of
the fonts that are in their library.
So as Nathan kept pointing out,
you don't have to shut
down your application,
or your users don't have to
shut down your application,
just to be able to get a new
font that's been dropped into
one of their fonts folders.
That's a big thing, and we need your help
to be able to do that.
Secondly, and I won't go into much
more detail here today,
but it bears mentioning,
you can also send notifications
to the font server if,
for example, your application installs
fonts programmatically using,
let's say,
the file manager calls or standard
Unix file system calls that pass
underneath the radar of the system.
We've got hooks into places
like the finder that let us
know when changes occur within
the standard font directories.
But if your application, for example,
at launch time installs
application-specific fonts,
this is a key way to actually
notify the font system that
something else has changed.
And what we will do is
we'll scan the directory,
identify those changes,
and then do a broadcast out to
all the clients who are interested
and have subscribed for changes.
So getting back to the first point,
in order to make your
applications more responsive,
all you have to do is implement
one callback function to
handle the notification.
What you next have to do is basically
register it with the system,
and you're done.
All you have to do is call the standard
ATS font notification subscribe function,
pass in your callback.
You can also pass in a
refcon if you want to,
so you can get additional data
into your callback function.
But otherwise, that's all it takes.
When you want to deregister,
it's not required,
but if you want to get rid of
it before your app shuts down,
you can certainly do that with a
similar function in the ATS font API.
Okay, so the next topic.
I'll be talking about how to
exchange data back and forth with
the other components in the system.
First and foremost,
the easiest thing to remember
about exchanging data with
Cocoa and the underlying Quartz
system is that fonts are uniquely
identified by PostScript name.
Whenever you get a name
back from within Cocoa,
it will be generally a PostScript name.
Similarly, if you want to instantiate
an NSFont instance,
when you're asked for a name,
you can query the ATS font
system for the PostScript name,
pass it in along with the size,
and you can instantiate
an NSFont reference.
On Panther,
we've also implemented support for a more
powerful kind of mega NS font reference.
It's the NS font descriptor.
You could think of it this way.
As opposed to just one
instance or one font,
within the Font Panel,
you can take a whole slice across it and
actually specify a descriptor for that.
So here's an example.
You can actually specify an NSFont
descriptor just by the family name,
and that will include all the
fonts that belong within that
family as one descriptor.
Similarly, you can go off in the other
direction and get more detail.
You can specify a family or just,
let's say, a font by postscript name,
and that's more like
the traditional NSFont.
Or you could go even
further and specify a size,
which gives you what we
traditionally call a strike.
It's one specific combination of
font and size within that class.
There are other attributes
that you can actually pass in,
as opposed to passing in
a postscript name or other
information that includes stuff.
Well, the way it works is with
the font descriptor class,
you can pass in a
dictionary of attributes.
And the more information you put in,
the more specific the descriptor will be.
Okay, so when you work with Carbon,
that's had a longer history
in terms of the different font
references that are available.
But one key thing to remember is that
both the ATSUI and Quickdraw components,
they support identifying fonts
uniquely by the traditional Quickdraw
font family name and style bit array.
Note that ATSUI is actually
pretty cool in that it actually
handles the core graphics,
so the quartz mechanism also.
So you can handle those font references
using the PostScript name also.
One thing that we provide
at both the Quick Draw,
well,
primarily at the Quick Draw layer is
conversion functions that allow you
to go back and forth between the newer
ATS font references and the older font
references and font family references.
One of the key reasons we ask you
to do that is that in the future,
or also even now,
there are slight differences
within the data types.
Some are, there's sign differences,
and there's also size differences.
Some of the references are 16-bit as
opposed to 32-bit or 32-bit signed.
What these conversion functions allow
you to do is kind of shield yourself
from any future changes and also any
potential changes that might happen
if you simply assign one of the older
data types to the newer ATS font ones.
So please, avoid typecasting,
use the conversion functions,
avoid direct assignment because
you might get implicit type
promotion that causes confusion.
problems with the signage.
Use the conversion functions.
Okay, so let me get into some more
details about mucking around with
the contents of the font registry.
Now, why would you want to do this?
Well, think of it this way.
Here's a typical example.
You've got a font that you've
licensed with your application,
you use it in your user interface,
but you don't want to stick
it for general purpose usage
out in the standard library.
And so what you can do is you can
actually activate that privately just
exactly the same way the file system
or the operating system would do,
but just for your font.
What I'll be talking about is
giving you a chance to kind of
hook into that and take advantage
of that also if you're interested.
So when you activate
and deactivate fonts,
what we recommend that you do
is pass in a file reference.
That's really the easiest
way for you to do it,
mainly because there's a lot
of information there that we
can actually parse through,
file types, contents of the files,
even suffixes on the files,
to figure out what exact format it is.
We can take care of the rest for you,
so you don't have to worry about it.
Note that up here,
I'm passing in an unspecified format,
mainly because I'm passing
in a file reference.
Another cool thing that you can
take advantage of is if you put,
let's say, your app-specific font
within your bundle someplace,
maybe within the resource
folder of the bundle,
you can just pass in a pointer
to the top level of the bundle.
We'll trundle down through it
recursively and activate any fonts that
reside in any of the subdirectories.
Another part of this example is
that I've actually activated the
font locally so that it's only
available for my application.
What you get back from this
function is a container reference.
With this container reference,
you can later deactivate exactly the
same set of fonts that were stored in
that file or in that directory using
this function to deactivate the fonts.
There's one thing that's pretty cool,
though, is that ATS will keep track
of fonts that are activated
locally within your applications,
so you don't have to
get rid of it yourself.
When your app shuts down,
we'll deactivate those fonts for you.
Okay, so with Panther,
we've provided support for
additional APIs or classes that
allow you to modify the contents
and remove and add font collections,
just as the Font Book does.
In Cocoa,
you simply use the NSFontManager
class with a variety of new
APIs that are available to do this.
Similarly, we've implemented support in
Carbon with C callable wrapper
functions to those same methods that
let you call these functions from
within your Carbon applications.
So font collections,
they're identified uniquely by name.
What you see up on the Font Panel are the
unique names for those font collections.
Another cool thing is that font
collections go back to those font
descriptors I described earlier.
So the same actions that users can do to
kind of grab an instance of a font or,
you know, a particular font strike,
drag it in and set up a
font collection entry,
you can do the same thing at this level
as long as you define a font descriptor.
Okay, we're almost there.
I've got two sections describing
how to interact directly
with the ATS font system.
The first one, if you notice,
I've badged this with the caches
entry in the architecture diagram.
The reason for this is that we've
implemented a number of high-level
functions that optimize access
to this data through the caching
system as much as possible.
So we've identified that you guys
tend to use PostScript names a lot,
especially with my recommendation on
interacting with the Cocoa Tech system.
We've got that optimized.
We also have an optimized function
to get at the file references
associated with a particular font.
All of this information is
cached so that you don't have to
worry about triggering messages,
hitting file system,
making file system calls,
and potentially even triggering
font rasterization effort.
Now, what I'll go into in more detail in
the next two slides are the lower level
functions that bypass those higher level,
easy to use functions.
And that includes the function
that lets you kind of go
straight to the file system,
grab the font data out of those files,
and parse it yourself.
I'll also give you some information on
how to enumerate every single font or
font family within the font registry and
do whatever you want with those entries.
So when you want to pull out data related
to fonts directly from the file system,
we provided a couple of
standard functions to do that.
This one happens to be the
one to get the font table.
Think of it this way.
The way we've made a standard format for
the fonts is similar to the way TrueType
fonts or OpenType fonts are defined.
They consist of a
directory of font tables,
each of which contain a
specific class of data.
So I mentioned earlier in
the presentation that we have
character mapping tables.
Those are stored in tables that are
indicated by the CMAP tag or C-M-A-P.
We also have support for
accessing the glyph data.
You can access any of the font table
data that's available for these fonts.
Now the convention is you make an
initial call to these functions,
either ATS font, get table,
or the directory version.
You pass it in the font ref and the
tag indicating what data you want,
and you pass in a null buffer.
In return,
you get back the length of the data
that the function will return to you.
And this is what happens
in the second call.
In the second call,
you can actually malloc right then and
there a buffer to hold that data based
on the size you got in the first call.
Pass in the buffer this time and get it
filled in with the data that you need.
Now if you have any more questions
about how to process this information,
it's available in the specs
for the OpenType font format
and the TrueType font format.
So as you can see,
this is pretty low-level stuff,
but for a lot of you out there,
this is your meat and potatoes.
This is what you want to deal with.
The other people involved with this
usually use the high-level functions.
So if you have any requests for us,
we'd be happy to implement it.
So please, use the bug reporter.
Let us know what features you'd
like to have that otherwise you'd
have to go through the lower levels
of the ATS font system to get at.
Okay, when you enumerate
fonts and font families,
there's a similar convention,
or there's a standard convention also,
and they consist of iterator objects.
Essentially,
all you have to do is create an iterator
object based on a bunch of criteria.
Set up a while loop that
calls the iterator object
for each successive entry.
And when it's done,
it'll give you a status code back
indicating that the iteration is done.
And then finally,
you release the iterator object
to return the system resources
back to the operating system.
So some of the different things
you can do with the iterator
object include filtering them.
You can pass in any of a variety
of standard predefined filters,
such as filtering by font
location or by the generation
in which they got activated.
So if you want to find out if there
were any fonts that were activated
after you last checked the registry,
you can check a generation count
and then filter based on that.
You can also pass in your own
custom filter function to do
the filtering yourself based on
whatever criteria you specify.
And if you notice here,
I'm actually using a similar way to
restrict or actually in this case,
totally unrestrict the
scope of the iteration.
I've chosen a global context with
unrestricted scope so I can see
every single font available on
the system for all the processes.
Okay, one last item.
When you want to access glyph data,
this is where you interact
directly with the font rasterizers.
Or, in this particular case,
the ATSUI text system
eases the burden on you somewhat
and allows you to mimic exactly
what the ATSUI tech system does,
but gets you back this data directly.
So it has two functions to access two
different flavors of glyph data format,
glyph paths in two different formats.
Essentially,
the glyph paths define the shape of
the glyphs that you can then pass into,
let's say,
the court system or draw yourself
directly on screen or manipulate just
as if it were a regular graphics object.
Now the ATSUI APIs take advantage of
the higher levels of the ATSUI system,
so you can pass in information from
a standard ATSUI text layout object.
So you can take advantage
of how it specifies,
let's say, a run of characters,
pass that information in,
and get just the glyph
information for those characters.
In addition, they match exactly the
way ATSUI would draw it,
so you can still take advantage of
trying to mimic exactly what ATSUI does,
but get into the lower layers
of it and directly access the
font data through these APIs.
So usually what you do is you
determine what the native glyph data
format is for a particular font,
and there's an API to do that.
If you don't do that,
the functions for accessing the
glyph pass will actually convert
the data accordingly for you.
So if you ask for quadratic and
you ask to get the glyph data
for a PostScript font that's
normally defined in cubic data,
then it will convert it accordingly.
The other thing that you have to do
is implement a series of callback
functions that process the standard
Standard operations that
define the glyph's shape.
So this includes, for example,
let's say in cubic,
you have a move to operator,
a line to operator, a curve to operator,
and a closed path operator.
The line to operator basically
defines a straight line segment,
and the curve to defines
any arbitrary curve.
Okay.
So just to wrap things up here,
what I've talked about today is
that there's a lot going on in
the operating system that hides
the complexity of fonts for you.
We've implemented a lot of stuff.
You've seen how the architecture works
and how they interact and how they touch
on the APIs that you take advantage
of at your level in your software.
The other thing I've covered is that
if you go away from WWDC and implement
just these two aspects of the system,
you're going to help us push forward this
idea of putting the user at the center
and making it so much easier to use their
fonts and so much powerful that people
will be flocking to your applications.
So adopt the standard user interface.
Add support for handling
the fonts window.
You see how much you'll get with it.
The typography palette,
the character palette,
the interaction with FontBook,
and handling support
for font collections.
At the very least,
you should also support handling
font notifications so that your
apps become much more responsive
to changes in the system.
There are a couple of related
topics either later on this week
or that you can review after WWDC.
It includes the Unicode session
and the Cocoa Text session.
Our evangelist for this
area is Xavier Legro,
so you can contact him specifically
about some of those bugs or
features or new APIs that you like.
And something that you
guys have been asking for,
documentation on this part of the system.
Well, my team has worked really hard this
year to put together the documentation
with the technical publications people,
and we've got them up there.
So take a look at them.
They're really cool.
There's also related documentation
about the various text
systems available on Mac OS X,
including Atsui, Cocoa,
and there's also documentation
for the legacy font manager
APIs available in Quickdraw.